README.md, before:

PHP-Internals-Book
==================

Document format: RST
--------------------

The book is written using ReStructured Text and generated using Sphinx.

 * RST manual: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html
 * RST quickref: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickref.html
 * Sphinx manual: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/markup/index.html

Coding style
------------

The following "coding style" applies to the written text, not to the included code.

 * The maximum line-width for text is 120 characters.
 * The maximum line-width for code is 98 characters. Including the four space indentation this would be a limit of 102 characters. This is a hard limit that prevents overflows in the PDF version.
 * Indentation uses four spaces.
 * Lines should not have trailing whitespace.
 * Punctuation like `?`, `!` or `:` should directly follow after the word (e.g. `foo:` rather than `foo :`).

Domains
-------

These domains have been bought by Anthony to publish info about the book:

 * phpinternalsbook.com
 * phpcorebook.com
 * insidephpbook.com

Only the first domain is currently in use.

Authors
-------

* Julien Pauli: jpauli@php.net
* Nikita Popov: nikic@php.net
* Anthony Ferrara: ircmaxell@php.net

Commit message:

Added link to Japanese Translation
closes #6

README.md, after:

PHP-Internals-Book
==================

Document format: RST
--------------------

The book is written using ReStructured Text and generated using Sphinx.

 * RST manual: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html
 * RST quickref: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/user/rst/quickref.html
 * Sphinx manual: http://sphinx.pocoo.org/markup/index.html

Coding style
------------

The following "coding style" applies to the written text, not to the included code.

 * The maximum line-width for text is 120 characters.
 * The maximum line-width for code is 98 characters. Including the four space indentation this would be a limit of 102 characters. This is a hard limit that prevents overflows in the PDF version.
 * Indentation uses four spaces.
 * Lines should not have trailing whitespace.
 * Punctuation like `?`, `!` or `:` should directly follow after the word (e.g. `foo:` rather than `foo :`).

Domains
-------

These domains have been bought by Anthony to publish info about the book:

 * phpinternalsbook.com
 * phpcorebook.com
 * insidephpbook.com

Only the first domain is currently in use.

A Japanese translation is already published and lives at [http://phpinternalsbook-ja.com/](http://phpinternalsbook-ja.com/).

Authors
-------

* Julien Pauli: jpauli@php.net
* Nikita Popov: nikic@php.net
* Anthony Ferrara: ircmaxell@php.net
